---
layout: post
title:  "Teaching someone to play Dwarf Fortress"
date:   2015-06-05 2:08:46
tags: wife fiancee girlfriend how to teach dwarf fortress new player
categories: love-games
---

### Meet Urist McKaitryn the Dwarf

My favorite game of all time is [Dwarf
Fortress](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=dwarf+fortress). My gaming heart was hard won
over the course of two months. Anyone who has ever tried playing DF, knows it
has perhaps the steepest learning curve in gaming history. And while I can be
very critical, I make sure to become proficient at playing something before
making judgements about it. So after two months of
[fun](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Losing) and a lot of help
from my barely-experienced brother, I discovered the glory of DF.


Like any aspect of my life, I want to share it with my one and only, Kaitryn
Dale. Kaitryn was already a gamer with some pretty obsessive and jealous games
on her shelf, but none of them [ruin your
life](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Siege#Necromancer_sieges)
like DF. She had helplessly watched me recede into the procedurally generated
worlds several times and always expressed the typical uninitiated disgust at the
GUI. For years it prevented her from dipping her toes in, but two months ago in
April, she finally decided to give it a try.

I had warned her that it took me two full months with guidance from my brother
to finally make a functioning fortress. She agreed and I started teaching her.
Three days later, on her second embarking, she was at (if not beyond) my two
month skill level. I attribute this speedy success to her relentless desire to
be a suitable Dwarven wife, along with my expertise at the game and my knack for
instruction of course. She basically hurdled over any learning curve and became
a regular [Urist](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/urist). My two month
trial did lead me down some strange paths which ended up leveling out our skill
levels at the two month mark. Her two months were very different from mine,
however. Rather than struggling through
[fun](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Werebeast) game after
[fun](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Tantrum) game, she got to
build real fortresses with goals, huge migrations, and cataclysmically fun
endings.

So now I'm going to explain some of the key things I learned about overcoming
the learning curve of Dwarf Fortress:


### In a game without graphics, concepts are even more crucial.


More so than even purely text based games, DF has an issue helping players
visualize the events of the game. Compounded by the multitude of concurrent
events and [unfamiliar fantastical
elements](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Floating_guts) you're
kind of left in the dark as a new player. In a visually driven game such as
[League of Legends](http://gamepadreviews.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/407350-league-of-legends-windows-screenshot-two-vs-one-ryze-probably.jpg)
or [FTL: Faster Than Light](http://cdn-static.gamekult.com/gamekult-com/images/photos/30/50/06/62/ftl-faster-than-light-screenshot-ME3050066271_2.jpg)
you see characters and figures walking around or attacking, and after a few
clicks and keystrokes, you get the general concepts of the game such as who you
are controlling or the boundaries between the UI and the rest of the game.
Contrast that to the ASCII art of DF and you might understand how some DF games
never even get past embarking.

The menu interfaces are perhaps the greatest point of confusion for new players,
so understanding that you are an omniscient force who cannot interact directly
with the world can be very important to even the most basic instances of playing
the game. Nonconceptually, you need to know which workers will listen to which
designations, what a
[burrow](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Burrow) is, and the
differences between statuses, announcements, reports, et cetera. The player's
job is to observe and delegate (and sometimes panic), nothing more.
Understanding what job you currently need completed is the first step toward
building a great fortress.

 It's important to note that Kaitryn learned many of the concepts of Dwarf
 fortress by listening to my fanboy tales months or in some cases years before
 ever playing herself. Usually you only discover the importance of the military
 once you've been murdered by a seige or [forgotten
 beast](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Forgotten_beast), or you
 miss out on the clutch goods of caravans because you haven't been crafting any
 exports, or you underestimate [the value of a
 gelder](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:Catsplosion). All of
 those lessons are difficult to learn without trial and error or a ready guide.
 If you're on your own, the internet can usually help you out. The [docs at
 Dwarf Fortress Wiki](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Main_Page) has
 saved many a dwarves lives over the years.

### On every task, buckle down

The biggest self-imposed barrier in Dwarf Fortress (aside from qutting for
months at a time out of frustration) is yak shaving. Simply put, taking on a new
task or project or problem when you haven't finished the one you're currently
working on.

A demonstrative example of this is when you're approaching your first
underground [dwarf-made
farm](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:farming#Subterranean_Farming).
You will invariably make mistakes such as accidental flooding, cave-ins, or
fortress insecurity. When trying to correct these mistakes or perhaps using some
foresight to avoid them, something else is likey to come up. I've seen a new
player with no plants left to brew take an entire year to successfully grow a
plump helmet.

The most prominent
interrupter is the [strange
mood](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/DF2014:strange_mood).
While experienced players find them a boon to be handled in a matter of minutes,
a new player has to figure out and deal with a very specific problem which the
internet may not be able to answer easily. If your first mood requires metal
bars, how the heck do you satisfy the crazy dwarf when you haven't even made a
forge yet let alone fuel.

Which leads me to the next point

### Prioritize the expectable

Trading, fey moods, eventually seiges, secure tombs-trap entry ways

1. Kaitryn playing Dwarf Fortress
